AGENDA 21, CHAPTER 1


PREAMBLE

NOTE: This is a final, advanced version of a chapter of Agenda 21, as adopted by the Plenary 
in Rio de Janeiro, on June 14, 1992. This document will be further edited, translated into the
official languages, and published by the United Nations for the General Assembly this autumn.

........../2

1.1. Humanity stands at a defining moment in history. We are confronted with a perpetuation 
of disparities between and within nations, a worsening of poverty, hunger, ill health and 
illiteracy, and the continuing deterioration of the ecosystems on which we depend for our 
well-being. However, integration of environment and development concerns and greater 
attention to them will lead to the fulfilment of basic needs, improved living standards for 
all, better protected and managed ecosystems and a safer, more prosperous future. No nation 
can achieve this on its own; but together we can - in a global partnership for sustainable 
development.

1.2. This global partnership must build on the premises of General Assembly resolution 44/228
of 22 December 1989, which was adopted when the nations of the world called for the United 
Nations Conference on Environment and Development, and on the acceptance of the need to take 
a balanced and integrated approach to environment and development questions.

1.3. Agenda 21 addresses the pressing problems of today and also aims at preparing the world 
for the challenges of the next century. It reflects a global consensus and political 
commitment at the highest level on development and environment cooperation. Its successful 
implementation is first and foremost the responsibility of Governments. 1/ National 
strategies, plans, policies and processes are crucial in achieving this. International 
cooperation should support and supplement such national efforts. In this context, the United 
Nations system has a key role to play. Other international, regional and subregional 
organizations are also called upon to contribute to this effort. The broadest public 
participation and the active involvement of the non-governmental organizations and other 
groups should also be encouraged.

1.4. The developmental and environmental objectives of Agenda 21 will require a substantial 
flow of new and additional financial resources to developing countries, in order to cover the 
incremental costs for the actions they have to undertake to deal with global environmental 
problems and to accelerate sustainable development. Financial resources are also required for 
strengthening the capacity of international institutions for the implementation of Agenda 21. 
An indicative order of magnitude assessment of costs is included in each of the programme 
areas. This assessment will need to be examined and refined by the relevant implementing 
agencies and organizations.

1.5. In the implementation of the relevant programme areas identified in Agenda 21, special at
tention should be given to the particular circumstances facing the economies in transition. 
It must also be recognized that these countries are facing unprecedented challenges in 
transforming their economies, in some cases in the midst of considerable social and political 
tension.

1.6. The programme areas that constitute Agenda 21 are described in terms of the basis for 
action, objectives, activities and means of implementation. Agenda 21 is a dynamic programme. 
It will be carried out by the various actors according to the different situations, capacities
and priorities of countries and in full respect of all the principles contained in the Rio 
Declaration on Environment and Development. It could evolve over time in the light of changing
needs and circumstances. This process marks the beginning of a new global partnership for 
sustainable development.

1.7. Throughout Agenda 21 the term "environmentally sound" means "environmentally safe and 
sound", in particular when applied to the terms "energy sources", "energy supplies", "energy 
systems", or "technology/technologies".


Notes

1/ When the term Governments is used, it will be deemed to include the European Economic 
Community within its areas of competence.A:21 Preamble (Ch. 1), Advance CopyPage 1




AGENDA 21, CHAPTER 2

SECTION I. SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC DIMENSIONS

INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION TO ACCELERATE SUSTAINABLEDEVELOPMENT IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES AND 
RELATED DOMESTIC POLICIES



NOTE: This is a final, advanced version of a chapter of Agenda 21, as adopted by the Plenary 
in Rio de Janeiro, on June 14, 1992. This document will be further edited, translated into 
the official languages, and published by the United Nations for the General Assembly this 
autumn.



........../2


INTRODUCTION

2.1. In order to meet the challenges of environment and development, States decided to 
establish a new global partnership. This partnership commits all States to engage in a 
continuous and constructive dialogue, inspired by the need to achieve a more efficient and 
equitable world economy, keeping in view the increasing interdependence of the community of 
nations, and that sustainable development should become a priority item on the agenda of the 
international community. It is recognized that, for the success of this new partnership, it 
is important to overcome confrontation and to foster a climate of genuine cooperation and 
solidarity. It is equally important to strengthen national and international policies and 
multinational cooperation to adapt to the new realities.

2.2. Economic policies of individual countries and international economic relations both have
great relevance to sustainable development. The reactivation and acceleration of development 
requires both a dynamic and a supportive international economic environment and determined 
policies at the national level. It will be frustrated in the absence of either of these 
requirements. A supportive external economic environment is crucial. The development process 
will not gather momentum if the global economy lacks dynamism and stability and is beset with 
uncertainties. Neither will it gather momentum if the developing countries are weighted down 
by external indebtedness, if development finance is inadequate, if barriers restrict access 
to markets and if commodity prices and the terms of trade of developing countries remain 
depressed. The record of the 1980s was essentially negative on each of these counts and needs 
to be reversed. The policies and measures needed to create an international environment that 
is strongly supportive of national development efforts are thus vital. International 
cooperation in this area should be designed to complement and support - not to diminish or 
subsume - sound domestic economic policies, in both developed and developing countries, if 
global progress towards sustainable development is to be achieved.

2.3. The international economy should provide a supportive international climate for 
achieving environment and development goals by:

(a) Promoting sustainable development through trade liberalization;

(b) Making trade and environment mutually supportive;

(c) Providing adequate financial resources to developing countries and dealing with
international debt.


(d) Encouraging macroeconomic policies conducive to environment and development.

2.4. Governments recognize that there is a new global effort to relate the elements of the 
international economic system and mankind's need for a safe and stable natural environment. 
Therefore, it is the intent of Governments that consensus-building at the intersection of the 
environmental and trade and development areas will be ongoing in existing international 
forums, as well as in the domestic policy of each country.


PROGRAMME AREAS

A. Promoting sustainable development through trade

Basis for action

2.5. An open, equitable, secure, non-discriminatory and predictable multilateral trading 
system that is consistent with the goals of sustainable development and leads to the optimal 
distribution of global production in accordance with comparative advantage is of benefit to 
all trading partners. Moreover, improved market access for developing countries' exports in 
conjunction with sound macroeconomic and environmental policies would have a positive 
environmental impact and therefore make an important contribution towards sustainable 
development.

2.6. Experience has shown that sustainable development requires a commitment to sound 
economic policies and management, an effective and predictable public administration, the 
integration of environmental concerns into decision-making and progress towards democratic 
government, in the light of country-specific conditions, which allows for full participation 
of all parties concerned. These attributes are essential for the fulfilment of the policy 
directions and objectives listed below.

2.7. The commodity sector dominates the economies of many developing countries in terms of 
production, employment and export earnings. An important feature of the world commodity 
economy in the 1980s was the prevalence of very low and declining real prices for most 
commodities in international markets and a resulting substantial contraction in commodity 
export earnings for many producing countries. The ability of those countries to mobilize, 
through international trade, the resources needed to finance investments required for 
sustainable development may be impaired by this development and by tariff and non-tariff 
impediments, including tariff escalation, limiting their access to export markets. The 
removal of existing distortions in international trade is essential. In particular, the 
achievement of this objective requires that there be substantial and progressive reduction in 
the support and protection of agriculture - covering internal regimes, market access and 
export subsidies - as well as of industry and other sectors, in order to avoid inflicting 
large losses on the more efficient producers, especially in developing countries. Thus, 
inagriculture, industry and other sectors, there is scope for initiatives aimed at trade 
liberalization and at policies to make production more responsive to environment and 
development needs. Trade liberalization should therefore be pursued on a global basis across 
economic sectors so as to contribute to sustainable development.

2.8. The international trading environment has been affected by a number of developments that 
have created new challenges and opportunities and have made multilateral economic cooperation 
of even greater importance. World trade has continued to grow faster than world output in recent 
years. However, the expansion of world trade has been unevenly spread, and only a limited number 
of developing countries have been capable of achieving appreciable growth in their exports. 
Protectionist pressures and unilateral policy actions continue to endanger the functioning of an 
open multilateral trading system, affecting particularly the export interests of developing 
countries. Economic integration processes have intensified in recent years and should impart 
dynamism to global trade and enhance the trade and development possibilities for developing 
countries. In recent years, a growing number of these countries have adopted courageous policy 
reforms involving ambitious autonomous trade liberalization, while far-reaching reforms and 
profound restructuring processes are taking place in Central and Eastern European countries, 
paving the way for their integration into the world economy and the international trading system. 
Increased attention is being devoted to enhancing the role of enterprises and promoting 
competitive markets through adoption of competitive policies. The GSP has proved to be a useful 
trade policy instrument, although its objectives will have to be fulfilled, and trade facilitation 
strategies relating to electronic data interchange (EDI) have been effective in improving the 
trading efficiency of the public and private sectors. The interactions between environment 
policies and trade issues are manifold and have not yet been fully assessed. An early, balanced, 
comprehensive and successful outcome of the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations would 
bring about further liberalization and expansion of world trade, enhance the trade and development 
possibilities of developing countries and provide greater security and predictability to the 
international trading system.

Objectives

2.9 In the years ahead, and taking into account the results of the Uruguay Round of multilateral 
trade negotiations, Governments should continue to strive to meet the following objectives:

(a) To promote an open, non-discriminatory and equitable multilateral trading system that will 
enable all countries - in particular, the developing countries - to improve their economic 
structures and improve the standard of living of their populations through sustained economic 
development;

(b) To improve access to markets for exports of developing countries;

(c) To improve the functioning of commodity markets and achieve sound, compatible and consistent 
commodity policies at national and international levels with a view to optimizing the contribution 
of the commodity sector to sustainable development, taking into account environmental considerations;

(d) To promote and support policies, domestic and international, that make economic growth and 
environmental protection mutually supportive.

Activities

(a) International and regional cooperation and coordination

Promoting an international trading system that takes account of the needs of developing countries

2.10. Accordingly, the international community should:

(a) Halt and reverse protectionism in order to bring about further liberalization and expansion of 
world trade, to the benefit of all countries, in particular the developing countries;

(b) Provide for an equitable, secure, non-discriminatory and predictable international trading system;

(c) Facilitate, in a timely way, the integration of all countries into the world economy and the 
international trading system;

(d) Ensure that environment and trade policies are mutually supportive, with a view to achieving 
sustainable development;

(e) Strengthen the international trade policies system through an early, balanced, comprehensive and 
successful outcome of the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations.

2.11. The international community should aim at finding ways and means of achieving a better 
functioning and enhanced transparency of commodity markets, greater diversification of the commodity 
sector in developing economies within a macroeconomic framework that takes into consideration a 
country's economic structure, resource endowments and market opportunities, and better management of 
natural resources that takes into account the necessities of sustainable development.

2.12. Therefore, all countries should implement previous commitments to halt and reverse protectionism 
and further expand market access, particularly in areas of interest to developing countries. This 
improvement of market access will be facilitated by appropriate structural adjustment in developed 
countries. Developing countries should continue the trade-policy reforms and structural adjustment 
they have undertaken. It is thus urgent to achieve an improvement in market access conditions for 
commodities, notably through the progressive removal of barriers that restrict imports, particularly 
from developing countries, of commodity products in primary and processed forms, as well as the 
substantial and progressive reduction of types of support that induce uncompetitive production, 
such as production and export subsidies.

(b) Management related activities

Developing domestic policies that maximize the benefits of trade liberalization for sustainable 
development

2.13. For developing countries to benefit from the liberalization of trading systems, they should 
implement the following policies, as appropriate:

(a) Create a domestic environment supportive of an optimal balance between production for the 
domestic and export markets and remove biases against exports and discourage inefficient 
import-substitution;

(b) Promote the policy framework and the infrastructure required to improve the efficiency of export 
and import trade as well as the functioning of domestic markets.

2.14. The following policies should be adopted by developing countries with respect to commodities 
consistent with market efficiency:

(a) Expand processing, distribution and improve marketing practices and the competitiveness of the 
commodity sector;

(b) Diversify in order to reduce dependence on commodity exports;

(c) Reflect efficient and sustainable use of factors of production in the formation of commodity prices, 
including the reflection of environmental, social and resources costs.

(c) Data and information

Encouraging data collection and research

2.15. GATT, UNCTAD and other relevant institutions should continue to collect appropriate trade data and 
information. The Secretary-General of the United Nations is requested to strengthen the Trade Control 
Measures Information System managed by UNCTAD.

Improving international cooperation in commodity trade and the diversification of the sector

2.16. With regard to commodity trade, Governments should, directly or through appropriate international 
organizations, where appropriate:

(a) Seek optimal functioning of commodity markets, inter alia, through improved market transparency 
involving exchanges of views and information on investment plans, prospects and markets for individual 
commodities. Substantive negotiations between producers and consumers should be pursued with a view to 
achieving viable and more efficient international agreements that take into account market trends, or 
arrangements, as well as study groups. In this regard, particular attention should be paid to the 
agreements on cocoa, coffee, sugar and tropical timber. The importance of international commodity 
agreements and arrangements is underlined. Occupational health and safety matters, technology transfer 
and services associated with the production, marketing and promotion of commodities, as well as 
environmental considerations, should be taken into account;

(b) Continue to apply compensation mechanisms for shortfalls in commodity export earnings of developing 
countries in order to encourage diversification efforts;

(c) Provide assistance to developing countries upon request in the design and implementation of commodity 
policies and the gathering and utilization of information on commodity markets;

(d) Support the efforts of developing countries to promote the policy framework and infrastructure 
required to improve the efficiency of export and import trade;

(e) Support the diversification initiatives of the developing countries at the national, regional and 
international levels.

Means of implementation

(a) Financing and cost evaluation

2.17. The Conference secretariat has estimated the average total annual cost (1993-2000) of implementing 
the activities in this programme area to be about $8.8 billion from the international community on 
grant or concessional terms. These are indicative and order of magnitude estimates only and have not 
been reviewed by governments. Actual costs and financial terms, including any that are non-concessional, 
will depend upon, inter alia, the specific strategies and programmes governments decide upon for 
implementation.

(b) Capacity-building

2.18. The above-mentioned technical cooperation activities aim at strengthening national capabilities 
for design and implementation of commodity policy, use and management of national resources and the 
gathering and utilization of information on commodity markets.


B. Making trade and environment mutually supportive

Basis for action

2.19. Environment and trade policies should be mutually supportive. An open, multilateral trading 
system makes possible a more efficient allocation and use of resources and thereby contributes to an 
increase in production and incomes and to lessening demands on the environment. It thus provides 
additional resources needed for economic growth and development and improved environmental protection. 
A sound environment, on the other hand, provides the ecological and other resources needed to sustain 
growth and underpin a continuing expansion of trade. An open, multilateral trading system, supported 
by the adoption of sound environmental policies, would have a positive impact on the environment and 
contribute to sustainable development.

2.20. International cooperation in the environmental field is growing, and in a number of cases trade 
provisions in multilateral environment agreements have played a role in tackling global environmental 
challenges. Trade measures have thus been used in certain specific instances, where considered 
necessary, to enhance the effectiveness of environmental regulations for the protection of the 
environment. Such regulations should address the root causes of environmental degradation so as not 
to result in unjustified restrictions on trade. The challenge is to ensure that trade and environment 
policies are consistent and reinforce the process of sustainable development. However, account should 
be taken of the fact that environmental standards valid for developed countries may have unwarranted 
social and economic costs in developing countries.

Objectives

2.21. Governments should strive to meet the following objectives, through relevant multilateral forums, 
including GATT, UNCTAD and other international organizations:

(a) To make international trade and environment policies mutually supportive in favour of sustainable 
development;

(b) To clarify the role of GATT, UNCTAD and other international organizations in dealing with trade and 
environment-related issues, including, where relevant, conciliation procedure and dispute settlement;

(c) To encourage international productivity and competitiveness and encourage a constructive role on the 
part of industry in dealing with environment and development issues.

Activities

Developing an environment/trade and development agenda

2.22. Governments should encourage GATT, UNCTAD and other relevant international and regional economic 
institutions to examine, in accordance with their respective mandates and competences, the following 
propositions and principles:

(a) Elaborate adequate studies for the better understanding of the relationship between trade and 
environment for the promotion of sustainable development;

(b) Promote a dialogue between trade, development and environment communities;

(c) In those cases when trade measures related to environment are used, ensure transparency and 
compatibility with international obligations;

(d) Deal with the root causes of environment and development problems in a manner that avoids the 
adoption of environmental measures resulting in unjustified restrictions on trade;

(e) Seek to avoid the use of trade restrictions or distortions as a means to offset differences in 
cost arising from differences in environmental standards and regulations, since their application 
could lead to trade distortions and increase protectionist tendencies;

(f) Ensure that environment-related regulations or standards, including those related to health and 
safety standards, do not constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination or a 
disguised restriction on trade;

(g) Ensure that special factors affecting environment and trade policies in the developing countries 
are borne in mind in the application of environmental standards, as well as in the use of any trade 
measures. It is worth noting that standards that are valid in the most advanced countries may be 
inappropriate and of unwarranted social cost for the developing countries;

(h) Encourage participation of developing countries in multilateral agreements through such 
mechanisms as special transitional rules;

(i) Avoid unilateral actions to deal with environmental challenges outside the jurisdiction of the 
importing country. Environmental measures addressing transborder or global environmental problems 
should, as far as possible, be based on an international consensus. Domestic measures targeted to 
achieve certain environmental objectives may need trade measures to render them effective. Should 
trade policy measures be found necessary for the enforcement of environmental policies, certain 
principles and rules should apply. These could include, inter alia, the principle of non-discrimination; 
the principle that the trade measure chosen should be the least trade-restrictive necessary to achieve 
the objectives; an obligation to ensure transparency in the use of trade measures related to the 
environment and to provide adequate notification of national regulations; and the need to give 
consideration to the special conditions and developmental requirements of developing countries as they 
move towards internationally agreed environmental objectives;

(j) Develop more precision, where necessary, and clarify the relationship between GATT provisions and 
some of the multilateral measures adopted in the environment area;

(k) Ensure public input in the formation, negotiation and implementation of trade policies as a means 
of fostering increased transparency in the light of country-specific conditions;

(l) Ensure that environmental policies provide the appropriate legal and institutional framework to 
respond to new needs for the protection of the environment that may result from changes in production 
and trade specialization.

C. Providing adequate financial resources to developing countries

Basis for action

2.23. Investment is critical to the ability of developing countries to achieve needed economic growth 
to improve the welfare of their populations and to meet their basic needs in a sustainable manner, all 
without deteriorating or depleting the resource base that underpins development. Sustainable development 
requires increased investment, for which domestic and external financial resources are needed. Foreign 
private investment and the return of flight capital, which depend on a healthy investment climate, are 
an important source of financial resources. Many developing countries have experienced a decade-long 
situation of negative net transfer of financial resources, during which their financial receipts were 
exceeded by payments they had to make, in particular for debt-servicing. As a result, domestically 
mobilized resources had to be transferred abroad instead of being invested locally in order to promote 
sustainable economic development.

2.24. For many developing countries, the reactivation of development will not take place without an early 
and durable solution to the problems of external indebtedness, taking into account the fact that, for 
many developing countries, external debt burdens are a significant problem. The burden of debt-service 
payments on those countries has imposed severe constraints on their ability to accelerate growth and 
eradicate poverty and has led to a contraction in imports, investment and consumption. External 
indebtedness has emerged as a main factor in the economic stalemate in the developing countries. 
Continued vigorous implementation of the evolving international debt strategy is aimed at restoring 
debtor countries' external financial viability, and the resumption of their growth and development 
would assist in achieving sustainable growth and development. In this context, additional financial 
resources in favour of developing countries and the efficient utilization of such resources are essential.

Objectives

2.25. The specific requirements for the implementation of the sectoral and cross-sectoral programmes 
included in Agenda 21 are dealt with in the relevant programme areas and in Chapter 33 entitled 
"Financial Resources and Mechanisms".

Activities

(a) Meeting international targets of official development assistance funding

2.26. As discussed in Chapter 33, new and additional resources should be provided to support Agenda 21 
programmes.

(b) Addressing the debt issue2.27. In regard to the external debt incurred with commercial banks, the 
progress being made under the strengthened debt strategy is recognized and a more rapid implementation 
of this strategy is encouraged. Some countries have already benefited from the combination of sound 
adjustment policies and commercial bank debt reduction or equivalent measures. The international 
community encourages:

(a) Other countries with heavy debts to banks to negotiate similar commercial bank debt reduction with 
their creditors;

(b) The parties to such a negotiation to take due account of both the medium-term debt reduction and new 
money requirements of the debtor country;

(c) Multilateral institutions actively engaged in the strengthened international debt strategy to continue 
to support debt-reduction packages related to commercial bank debt with a view to ensuring that the 
magnitude of such financing is consonant with the evolving debt strategy;

(d) Creditor banks to participate in debt and debt-service reduction;

(e) Strengthened policies to attract direct investment, avoid unsustainable levels of debt and foster 
the return of flight capital.

2.28. With regard to debt owed to official bilateral creditors, the recent measures taken by the Paris 
Club with regard to more generous terms of relief to the poorest most indebted countries are welcomed. 
Ongoing efforts to implement these "Trinidad terms" measures in a manner commensurate with the payments 
capacity of those countries and in a way that gives additional support to their economic reform efforts 
are welcomed. The substantial bilateral debt reduction undertaken by some creditor countries is also 
welcomed, and others which are in a position to do so are encouraged to take similar action.

2.29. The actions of low-income countries with substantial debt burdens which continue, at great cost, 
to service their debt and safeguard their creditworthiness are commended. Particular attention should 
be paid to their resource needs. Other debt-distressed developing countries which are making great 
efforts to continue to service their debt and meet their external financial obligations also deserve 
due attention.

2.30. In connection with multilateral debt, it is urged that serious attention be given to continuing 
to work towards growth-oriented solutions to the problem of developing countries with serious 
debt-servicing problems, including those whose debt is mainly to official creditors or to multilateral 
financial institutions. Particularly in the case of low-income countries in the process of economic 
reform, the support of the multilateral financial institutions in the form of new disbursements and 
the use of their concessional funds is welcomed. The use of support groups should be continued in 
providing resources to clear arrears of countries embarking upon vigorous economic reform programmes 
supported by IMF and the World Bank. Measures by the multilateral financial institutions such as the 
refinancing of interest on non-concessional loans with IDA reflows - "fifth dimension" - are noted 
with appreciation.

Means of implementation

Financing and cost evaluation

2.31. See Chapter 33.

D. Encouraging economic policies conducive to sustainable development

Basis for action

2.32. The unfavourable external environment facing developing countries makes domestic resource 
mobilization and efficient allocation and utilization of domestically mobilized resources all the 
more important for the promotion of sustainable development. In a number of countries, policies are 
necessary to correct misdirected public spending, large budget deficits and other macroeconomic 
imbalances, restrictive policies and distortions in the areas of exchange rates, investment and 
finance, and obstacles to entrepreneurship. In developed countries, continuing policy reform and 
adjustment, including appropriate savings rates, would help generate resources to support the 
transition to sustainable development both domestically and in developing countries.

2.33. Good management that fosters the association of effective, efficient, honest, equitable and 
accountable public administration with individual rights and opportunities is an essential element 
for sustainable, broadly based development and sound economic performance at all development levels. 
All countries should increase their efforts to eradicate mismanagement of public and private affairs, 
including corruption, taking into account the factors responsible for, and agents involved in, this 
phenomenon. 

2.34. Many indebted developing countries are undergoing structural adjustment programmes relating 
to debt rescheduling or new loans. While such programmes are necessary for improving the balance in 
fiscal budgets and balance-of-payments accounts, in some cases they have resulted in adverse social 
and environmental effects, such as cuts in allocations for health care, education and environmental 
protection. It is important to ensure that structural adjustment programmes do not have negative 
impacts on the environment and social development so that such programmes can be more in line with 
the objectives of sustainable development.

Objectives

2.35. It is necessary to establish, in the light of the country-specific conditions, economic policy 
reforms that promote the efficient planning and utilization of resources for sustainable development 
through sound economic and social policies, foster entrepreneurship and the incorporation of social 
and environmental costs in resource pricing, and remove sources of distortion in the area of trade 
and investment.

Activities

(a) Management-related activities

Promoting sound economic policies2.36. The industrialized countries and other countries in a position 
to do so should strengthen their efforts:

(a) To encourage a stable and predictable international economic environment, particularly with regard 
to monetary stability, real rates of interest and fluctuations in key exchange rates;

(b) To stimulate savings and reduce fiscal deficits;

(c) To ensure that the processes of policy coordination take into account the interests and concerns of 
the developing countries, including the need to promote positive action to support the efforts of the 
least developed countries to halt their marginalization in the world economy;

(d) To undertake appropriate national macroeconomic and structural policies aimed at promoting 
non-inflationary growth, narrowing their major external imbalances and increasing the adjustment 
capacity of their economies.

2.37. Developing countries should consider strengthening their efforts to implement sound economic policies:

(a) That maintain the monetary and fiscal discipline required to promote price stability and external balance;

(b) That result in realistic exchange rates;

(c) That raise domestic savings and investment, as well as improve returns to investment.

2.38. More specifically, all countries should develop policies that improve efficiency in the allocation of 
resources and take full advantage of the opportunities offered by the changing global economic environment. 
In particular, wherever appropriate, and taking into account national strategies and objectives, countries 
should:

(a) Remove the barriers to progress caused by bureaucratic inefficiencies, administrative strains, 
unnecessary controls and the neglect of market conditions;

(b) Promote transparency in administration and decision-making;

(c) Encourage the private sector and foster entrepreneurship by improving institutional facilities 
for enterprise creation and market entry. The essential objective would be to simplify or remove the 
restrictions, regulations and formalities that make it more complicated, costly and time-consuming to 
set up and operate enterprises in many developing countries;

(d) Promote and support the investment and infrastructure required for sustainable economic growth and 
diversification on an environmentally sound and sustainable basis;

(e) Provide scope for appropriate economic instruments, including market mechanisms, in harmony with the 
objectives of sustainable development and fulfilment of basic needs;

(f) Promote the operation of effective tax systems and financial sectors;

(g) Provide opportunities for small-scale enterprises, both farm and non-farm, and for the indigenous 
population and local communities to contribute fully to the attainment of sustainable development;

(h) Remove biases against exports and in favour of inefficient import substitution and establish policies 
that allow them to benefit fully from the flows of foreign investment, within the framework of national, 
social, economic and developmental goals;

(i) Promote the creation of a domestic economic environment supportive of an optimal balance between 
production for the domestic and export markets.

(b) International and regional cooperation and coordination

2.39. Governments of developed countries and those of other countries in a position to do so should, 
directly or through appropriate international and regional organizations and international lending 
institutions, enhance their efforts to provide developing countries with increased technical assistance 
for the following:

(a) Capacity-building in the nation's design and implementation of economic policies, upon request;

(b) Design and operation of efficient tax systems, accounting systems and financial sectors;

(c) Promotion of entrepreneurship.

2.40. International financial and development institutions should further review their policies and 
programmes in the light of the objective of sustainable development.

2.41. Stronger economic cooperation among developing countries has long been accepted as an important 
component of efforts to promote economic growth and technological capabilities and to accelerate 
development in the developing world. Therefore, the efforts of the developing countries to promote 
economic cooperation among themselves should be enhanced and continue to be supported by the 
international community.

Means of implementation

(a) Financing and cost evaluation

2.42. The Conference secretariat has estimated the average total annual cost (1993-2000) of implementing 
the activities in this programme area to be about $50 million from the international community on grant 
or concessional terms. These are indicative and order of magnitude estimates only and have not been 
reviewed by governments. Actual costs and financial terms, including any that are non-concessional, will 
depend upon, inter alia, the specific strategies and programmes governments decide upon for implementation.

(b) Capacity-building

2.43. The above-mentioned policy changes in developing countries involve substantial national efforts for 
capacity-building in the areas of public administration, central banking, tax administration, savings 
institutions and financial markets.

2.44. Particular efforts in the implementation of the four programme areas identified in this chapter are 
warranted in view of the especially acute environmental and developmental problems of the least developed 
countries.A21: International Cooperation (Ch. 2), Advance CopyPage 1



Chapter 3  -  Combating Poverty

This is a final, advanced version of a chapter of Agenda 21, as adopted by the Plenary in 
Rio de Janeiro, on June 14, 1992. This document will be further edited, translated into the official 
languages, and published by the United Nations for the General Assembly this autumn.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

                PROGRAMME AREA

Enabling the poor to achieve sustainable livelihoods

Basis for action

3.1. Poverty is a complex multidimensional problem with origins in both the national and international 
domains. No uniform solution can be found for global application. Rather, country-specific programmes to 
tackle poverty and international efforts supporting national efforts, as well as the parallel process of 
creating a supportive international environment, are crucial for a solution to this problem. The eradication 
of poverty and hunger, greater equity in income distribution and human resource development remain major 
challenges everywhere. The struggle against poverty is the shared responsibility of all countries.

3.2. While managing resources sustainably, an environmental policy that focuses mainly on the conservation 
and protection of resources must take due account of those who depend on the resources for their 
livelihoods. Otherwise it could have an adverse impact both on poverty and on chances for long-term 
success in resource and environmental conservation. Equally, a development policy that focuses mainly 
on increasing the production of goods without addressing the sustainability of the resources on which 
production is based will sooner or later run into declining productivity, which could also have an adverse 
impact on poverty. A specific anti-poverty strategy is therefore one of the basic conditions for ensuring 
sustainable development. An effective strategy for tackling the problems of poverty, development and 
environment simultaneously should begin by focusing on resources, production and people and should cover 
demographic issues, enhanced health care and education, the rights of women, the role of youth and of 
indigenous people and local communities and a democratic participation process in association with 
improved governance.

3.3. Integral to such action is, together with international support, the promotion of economic growth 
in developing countries that is both sustained and sustainable and direct action in eradicating poverty 
by strengthening employment and income-generating programmes.

Objectives

3.4. The long-term objective of enabling all people to achieve sustainable livelihoods should provide 
an integrating factor that allows policies to address issues of development, sustainable resource 
management and poverty eradication simultaneously. The objectives of this programme area are:

(a) To provide all persons urgently with the opportunity to earn a sustainable livelihood;

(b) To implement policies and strategies that promote adequate levels of funding and focus on integrated 
human development policies, including income generation, increased local control of resources, local 
institution-strengthening and capacity-building and greater involvement of non-governmental 
organizations and local levels of government as delivery mechanisms;

(c) To develop for all poverty-stricken areas integrated strategies and programmes of sound and 
sustainable management of the environment, resource mobilization, poverty eradication and alleviation, 
employment and income generation;

(d) To create a focus in national development plans and budgets on investment in human capital, with 
special policies and programmes directed at rural areas, the urban poor, women and children.

Activities

3.5. Activities that will contribute to the integrated promotion of sustainable livelihoods and 
environmental protection cover a variety of sectoral interventions involving a range of actors, from 
local to global, and are essential at every level, especially the community and local levels. Enabling 
actions will be necessary at the national and international levels, taking full account of regional and 
subregional conditions to support a locally driven and country-specific approach. In general design, 
the programmes should:

(a) Focus on the empowerment of local and community groups through the principle of delegating authority, 
accountability and resources to the most appropriate level to ensure that the programme will be 
geographically and ecologically specific;

(b) Contain immediate measures to enable those groups to alleviate poverty and to develop sustainability;

(c) Contain a long-term strategy aimed at establishing the best possible conditions for sustainable 
local, regional and national development that would eliminate poverty and reduce the inequalities 
between various population groups. It should assist the most disadvantaged groups - in particular, 
women, children and youth within those groups -and refugees. The groups will include poor smallholders, 
pastoralists, artisans, fishing communities, landless people, indigenous communities, migrants and the 
urban informal sector.

3.6. The focus here is on specific cross-cutting measures - in particular, in the areas of basic education, 
primary/maternal health care, and the advancement of women.

(a) Empowering communities

3.7. Sustainable development must be achieved at every level of society. Peoples' organizations, women's 
groups and non-governmental organizations are important sources of innovation and action at the local 
level and have a strong interest and proven ability to promote sustainable livelihoods. Governments, in 
cooperation with appropriate international and non-governmental organizations, should support a 
community-driven approach to sustainability, which would include, inter alia:

(a) Empowering women through full participation in decision-making;

(b) Respecting the cultural integrity and the rights of indigenous people and their communities;

(c) Promoting or establishing grass-roots mechanisms to allow for the sharing of experience and 
knowledge between communities;

(d) Giving communities a large measure of participation in the sustainable management and protection 
of the local natural resources in order to enhance their productive capacity;

(e) Establishing a network of community-based learning centres for capacity-building and sustainable 
development.

(b) Management-related activities

3.8. Governments, with the assistance of and in cooperation with appropriate international, 
non-governmental and local community organizations, should establish measures that will directly 
or indirectly:

(a) Generate remunerative employment and productive occupational opportunities compatible with 
country-specific factor endowments, on a scale sufficient to take care of prospective increases 
in the labour force and to cover backlogs;

(b) With international support, where necessary, develop adequate infrastructure, marketing systems, 
technology systems, credit systems and the like and the human resources needed to support the above 
actions and to achieve a widening of options for resource-poor people. High priority should be given 
to basic education and professional training;

(c) Provide substantial increases in economically efficient resource productivity and measures to 
ensure that the local population benefits in adequate measure from resource use;

(d) Empower community organizations and people to enable them to achieve sustainable livelihoods;

(e) Set up an effective primary health care and maternal health care system accessible to all;

(f) Consider strengthening/developing legal frameworks for land management, access to land resources and  
land ownership - in particular, for women - and for the protection of tenants;

(g) Rehabilitate degraded resources, to the extent practicable, and introduce policy measures to promote 
sustainable use of resources for basic human needs;

(h) Establish new community-based mechanisms and strengthen existing mechanisms to enable communities to 
gain sustained access to resources needed by the poor to overcome their poverty;

(i) Implement mechanisms for popular participation - particularly by poor people, especially women - in 
local community groups, to promote sustainable development;

(j) Implement, as a matter of urgency, in accordance with country-specific conditions and legal systems, 
measures to ensure that women and men have the same right to decide freely and responsibly on the number 
and spacing of their children and have access to the information, education and means, as appropriate, 
to enable them to exercise this right in keeping with their freedom, dignity and personally held values, 
taking into account ethical and cultural considerations. Governments should take active steps to 
implement programmes to establish and strengthen preventive and curative health facilities, which 
include women-centred, women-managed, safe and effective reproductive health care and affordable, 
accessible services, as appropriate, for the responsible planning of family size, in keeping with 
freedom, dignity and personally held values, taking into account ethical and cultural considerations. 
Programmes should focus on providing comprehensive health care, including pre-natal care, education 
and information on health and responsible parenthood and should provide the opportunity for all women 
to breast-feed fully, at least during the first four months post-partum. Programmes should fully support 
women's productive and reproductive roles and well-being, with special attention to the need for 
providing equal and improved health care for all children and the need to reduce the risk of maternal 
and child mortality and sickness;

(k) Adopt integrated policies aiming at sustainability in the management of urban centres;

(l) Undertake activities aimed at the promotion of food security and, where appropriate, food 
self-sufficiency within the context of sustainable agriculture;

(m) Support research on and integration of traditional methods of production that have been shown 
to be environmentally sustainable;

(n) Actively seek to recognize and integrate informal-sector activities into the economy by removing 
regulations and hindrances that discriminate against activities in those sectors;

(o) Consider making available lines of credit and other facilities for the informal sector and improved 
access to land for the landless poor so that they can acquire the means of production and reliable access 
to natural resources. In many instances special considerations for women are required. Strict feasibility 
appraisals are needed for borrowers to avoid debt crises;

(p) Provide the poor with access to fresh water and sanitation;

(q) Provide the poor with access to primary education.

(c) Data, information and evaluation

3.9. Governments should improve the collection of information on target groups and target areas in order 
to facilitate the design of focused programmes and activities, consistent with the target-group needs 
and aspirations. Evaluation of such programmes should be gender-specific, since women are a particularly 
disadvantaged group.

(d) International and regional cooperation and coordination

3.10. The United Nations system, through its relevant organs, organizations and bodies, in cooperation
with Member States and with appropriate international and non-governmental organizations, should make 
poverty alleviation a major priority and should: 

(a) Assist Governments, when requested, in the formulation and implementation of national action 
programmes on poverty alleviation and sustainable development. Action-oriented activities of 
relevance to the above objectives, such as poverty eradication, projects and programmes supplemented 
where relevant by food aid, and support and special emphasis on employment and income generation, 
should be given particular attention in this regard;

(b) Promote technical cooperation among developing countries for poverty eradication activities;

(c) Strengthen existing structures in the United Nations system for coordination of action relating 
to poverty eradication, including the establishment of a focal point for information exchange and 
the formulation and implementation of replicable pilot projects to combat poverty;

(d) In the follow-up of the implementation of Agenda 21, give high priority to the review of the 
progress made in eradicating poverty; (e) Examine the international economic framework, including 
resource flows and structural adjustment programmes, to ensure that social and environmental concerns 
are addressed, and in this connection, conduct a review of the policies of international organizations, 
bodies and agencies, including financial institutions, to ensure the continued provision of basic 
services to the poor and needy;

(f) Promote international cooperation to address the root causes of poverty. The development process 
will not gather momentum if developing countries are weighted down by external indebtedness, if 
development finance is inadequate, if barriers restrict access to markets and if commodity prices 
and the terms of trade in developing countries remain depressed.

Means of implementation

(a) Financing and cost evaluation

3.11. The Conference secretariat has estimated the average total annual cost (1993-2000) of 
implementing the activities of this programme to be about $30 billion including about $15 billion 
from the international community on grant or concessional terms. These are indicative and order of 
magnitude estimates only and have not been reviewed by governments. This estimate overlaps estimates 
in other parts of Agenda 21. Actual costs and financial terms, including any that are non-concessional,
will depend upon, inter alia, the specific strategies and programmes governments decide upon for 
implementation.

(b) Capacity-building

3.12. National capacity-building for implementation of the above activities is crucial and should be 
given high priority. It is particularly important to focus capacity-building at the local community 
level in order to support a community-driven approach to sustainability and to establish and 
strengthen mechanisms to allow sharing of experience and knowledge between community groups at national 
and international levels. Requirements for such activities are considerable and are related to the 
various relevant sectors of Agenda 21 calling for requisite international, financial and technological 
support.

A21: Combating Poverty (Ch. 3), Advance CopyPage 1



Chapter 4  -  Changing Consumption Patterns 

                This is a final, advanced version of a chapter of Agenda 21, as adopted by the Plenary 
in Rio de Janeiro, on June 14, 1992. This document will be further edited, translated into the official 
languages, and published by the United Nations for the General Assembly this autumn.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 


4.1. This chapter contains the following programme areas:

(a) Focusing on unsustainable patterns of production and consumption;

(b) Developing national policies and strategies to encourage changes in unsustainable consumption 
patterns.

4.2. Since the issue of changing consumption patterns is very broad, it is addressed in several parts 
of Agenda 21, notably those dealing with energy, transportation and wastes, and in the chapters on 
economic instruments and the transfer of technology. The present chapter should also be read in 
conjunction with chapter 5 (Demographic dynamics and sustainability).

PROGRAMME AREAS

A. Focusing on unsustainable patterns of production and consumption

Basis for action

4.3. Poverty and environmental degradation are closely interrelated. While poverty results in 
certain kinds of environmental stress, the major cause of the continued deterioration of the global 
environment is the unsustainable pattern of consumption and production, particularly in industrialized 
countries, which is a matter of grave concern, aggravating poverty and imbalances.

4.4. Measures to be undertaken at the international level for the protection and enhancement of the 
environment must take fully into account the current imbalances in the global patterns of consumption 
and production.

4.5. Special attention should be paid to the demand for natural resources generated by unsustainable 
consumption and to the efficient use of those resources consistent with the goal of minimizing 
depletion and reducing pollution. Although consumption patterns are very high in certain parts of 
the world, the basic consumer needs of a large section of humanity are not being met. This results 
in excessive demands and unsustainable lifestyles among the richer segments, which place immense 
stress on the environment. The poorer segments, meanwhile, are unable to meet food, health care, 
shelter and educational needs. Changing consumption patterns will require a multipronged strategy 
focusing on demand, meeting the basic needs of the poor, and reducing wastage and the use of finite 
resources in the production process.

4.6. Growing recognition of the importance of addressing consumption has also not yet been matched 
by an understanding of its implications. Some economists are questioning traditional concepts of 
economic growth and underlining the importance of pursuing economic objectives that take account of 
the full value of natural resource capital. More needs to be known about the role of consumption in 
relation to economic growth and population dynamics in order to formulate coherent international and 
national policies.

Objectives

4.7. Action is needed to meet the following broad objectives:

(a) To promote patterns of consumption and production that reduce environmental stress and will meet 
the basic needs of humanity;

(b) To develop a better understanding of the role of consumption and how to bring about more sustainable 
consumption patterns.Activities

(a) Management-related activities

Adopting an international approach to achieving sustainable consumption patterns

4.8. In principle, countries should be guided by the following basic objectives in their efforts to 
address consumption and lifestyles in the context of environment and development:

(a) All countries should strive to promote sustainable consumption patterns;

(b) Developed countries should take the lead in achieving sustainable consumption patterns;

(c) Developing countries should seek to achieve sustainable consumption patterns in their development 
process, guaranteeing the provision of basic needs for the poor, while avoiding those unsustainable 
patterns, particularly in industrialized countries, generally recognized as unduly hazardous to the 
environment, inefficient and wasteful, in their development processes. This requires enhanced 
technological and other assistance from industrialized countries.

4.9. In the follow-up of the implementation of Agenda 21 the review of progress made in achieving 
sustainable consumption patterns should be given high priority.

(b) Data and information

Undertaking research on consumption

4.10. In order to support this broad strategy, Governments, and/or private research and policy 
institutes, with the assistance of regional and international economic and environmental organizations, 
should make a concerted effort to:

(a) Expand or promote databases on production and consumption and develop methodologies for analysing 
them;

(b) Assess the relationship between production and consumption, environment, technological adaptation 
and innovation, economic growth and development, and demographic factors;

(c) Examine the impact of ongoing changes in the structure of modern industrial economies away from 
material-intensive economic growth;

(d) Consider how economies can grow and prosper while reducing the use of energy and materials and 
the production of harmful materials;

(e) Identify balanced patterns of consumption worldwide which the Earth can support in the long term.

Developing new concepts of sustainable economic growth and prosperity

4.11. Consideration should also be given to the present concepts of economic growth and the need for 
new concepts of wealth and prosperity which allow higher standards of living through changed lifestyles 
and are less dependent on the Earth's finite resources and more in harmony with the Earth's carrying 
capacity. This should be reflected in the evolution of new systems of national accounts and other 
indicators of sustainable development.

(c) International cooperation and coordination

4.12. While international review processes exist for examining economic, development and demographic 
factors, more attention needs to be paid to issues related to consumption and production patterns and 
sustainable lifestyles and environment.

4.13. In the follow-up of the implementation of Agenda 21, reviewing the role and impact of 
unsustainable production and consumption patterns and lifestyles and their relation to sustainable 
development should be given high priority.

Financing and cost evaluation

4.14. The Conference secretariat has estimated that implementation of this programme is not likely to 
require significant new financial resources.

B. Developing national policies and strategies to encourage changes in unsustainable consumption 
patterns

Basis for action

4.15. Achieving the goals of environmental quality and sustainable development will require efficiency 
in production and changes in consumption patterns in order to emphasize optimization of resource use 
and minimization of waste. In many instances, this will require reorientation of existing production 
and consumption patterns that have developed in industrial societies and are in turn emulated in much 
of the world.

4.16. Progress can be made by strengthening positive trends and directions that are emerging, as part 
of a process aimed at achieving significant changes in the consumption patterns of industries, 
Governments, households and individuals.

Objectives

4.17. In the years ahead, Governments, working with appropriate organizations, should strive to meet 
the following broad objectives:

(a) To promote efficiency in production processes and reduce wasteful consumption in the process of 
economic growth, taking into account the development needs of developing countries;

(b) To develop a domestic policy framework that will encourage a shift to more sustainable patterns 
of production and consumption;

(c) To reinforce both values that encourage sustainable production and consumption patterns and 
policies that encourage the transfer of environmentally sound technologies to developing countries.

Activities

(a) Encouraging greater efficiency in the use of energy and resources

4.18. Reducing the amount of energy and materials used per unit in the production of goods and 
services can contribute both to the alleviation of environmental stress and to greater economic 
and industrial productivity and competitiveness. Governments, in cooperation with industry, should 
therefore intensify efforts to use energy and resources in an economically efficient and 
environmentally sound manner by:

(a) Encouraging the dissemination of existing environmentally sound technologies;

(b) Promoting research and development in environmentally sound technologies;

(c) Assisting developing countries to use these technologies efficiently and to develop technologies 
suited to their particular circumstances;

(d) Encouraging the environmentally sound use of new and renewable sources of energy;

(e) Encouraging the environmentally sound and sustainable use of renewable natural resources.

(b) Minimizing the generation of wastes

4.19. At the same time, society needs to develop effective ways of dealing with the problem of 
disposing of mounting levels of waste products and materials. Governments, together with industry, 
households and the public, should make a concerted effort to reduce the generation of wastes and 
waste products by:

(a) Encouraging recycling in industrial processes and at the consumed level;

(b) Reducing wasteful packaging of products;

(c) Encouraging the introduction of more environmentally sound products.

(c) Assisting individuals and households to make environmentally sound purchasing decisions

4.20. The recent emergence in many countries of a more environmentally conscious consumer public, 
combined with increased interest on the part of some industries in providing environmentally sound 
consumer products, is a significant development that should be encouraged. Governments and 
international organizations, together with the private sector, should develop criteria and 
methodologies for the assessment of environmental impacts and resource requirements throughout 
the full life cycle of products and processes. Results of those assessments should be transformed 
into clear indicators in order to inform consumers and decision makers.

4.21. Governments, in cooperation with industry and other relevant groups, should encourage 
expansion of environmental labelling and other environmentally related product information 
programmes designed to assist consumers to make informed choices.

4.22. They should also encourage the emergence of an informed consumer public and assist 
individuals and households to make environmentally informed choices by:

(a) Providing information on the consequences of consumption choices and behaviour so as to 
encourage demand for environmentally sound products and use of products;

(b) Making consumers aware of the health and environmental impact of products, through such means 
as consumer legislation and environmental labelling;

(c) Encouraging specific consumer-oriented programmes, such as recycling and deposit/refund 
systems.

(d) Exercising leadership through government purchasing

4.23. Governments themselves also play a role in consumption, particularly in countries where the public 
sector plays a large role in the economy and can have a considerable influence on both corporate decisions 
and public perceptions. They should therefore review the purchasing policies of their agencies and 
departments so that they may improve, where possible, the environmental content of government procurement 
policies, without prejudice to international trade principles.

(e) Moving towards environmentally sound pricing

4.24. Without the stimulus of prices and market signals that make clear to producers and consumers the 
environmental costs of the consumption of energy, materials and natural resources and the generation of 
wastes, significant changes in consumption and production patterns seem unlikely to occur in the near 
future.

4.25. Some progress has begun in the use of appropriate economic instruments to influence consumer 
behaviour. These instruments include environmental charges and taxes, deposit/refund systems, etc. This 
process should be encouraged in the light of country-specific conditions.

(f) Reinforcing values that support sustainable consumption

4.26. Governments and private-sector organizations should promote more positive attitudes towards s
ustainable consumption through education, public awareness programmes and other means, such as positive 
advertising of products and services that utilize environmentally sound technologies or encourage 
sustainable production and consumption patterns. In the review of the implementation of Agenda 21, an 
assessment of the progress achieved in developing these national policies and strategies should be given 
due consideration.

Means of implementation

4.27. This programme is concerned primarily with changes in unsustainable patterns of consumption and 
production and values that encourage sustainable consumption patterns and lifestyles. It requires the 
combined efforts of Governments, consumers and producers. Particular attention should be paid to the 
significant role played by women and households as consumers and the potential impacts of their 
combined purchasing power on the economy.

A21: Changing Consumption Patterns (Ch.4), Advance CopyPage 1


Chapter 5  -  Demographic Dynamics And Sustainability 
      

This is a final, advanced version of a chapter of Agenda 21, as adopted by the Plenary in Rio de Janeiro, 
on June 14, 1992. This document will be further edited, translated into the official langauges, and 
published by the United Nations for the General Assembly this autumn.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 


                5.1. This chapter contains the following programme areas:

(a) Developing and disseminating knowledge concerning the links between demographic trends and factors and 
sustainable development;

(b) Formulating integrated national policies for environment and development, taking into account demographic 
trends and factors;

(c) Implementing integrated, environment and development programmes at the local level, taking into account 
demographic trends and factors.

PROGRAMME AREAS

A. Developing and disseminating knowledge concerning the links between demographic trends and factors and 
sustainable development

Basis for action

5.2. Demographic trends and factors and sustainable development have a synergistic relationship.

5.3. The growth of world population and production combined with unsustainable consumption patterns places 
increasingly severe stress on the life-supporting capacities of our planet. These interactive processes 
affect the use of land, water, air, energy and other resources. Rapidly growing cities, unless well-managed, 
face major environmental problems. The increase in both the number and size of cities calls for greater 
attention to issues of local government and municipal management. The human dimensions are key elements 
to consider in this intricate set of relationships and they should be adequately taken into consideration 
in comprehensive policies for sustainable development. Such policies should address the linkages of 
demographic trends and factors, resource use, appropriate technology dissemination, and development. 
Population policy should also recognize the role played by human beings in environmental and development 
concerns. There is a need to increase awareness of this issue among decision makers at all levels and to 
provide both better information on which to base national and international policies and a framework 
against which to interpret this information.

5.4. There is a need to develop strategies to mitigate both the adverse impact on the environment of human 
activities and the adverse impact of environmental change on human populations. The world's population is 
expected to exceed 8 billion by the year 2020. Sixty percent of the world's population already live in 
coastal areas, while 65 per cent of cities with populations above 2.5 million are located along the world 
coasts; several of them are already at or below the present sea level.Objectives

5.5. The following objectives should be achieved as soon as practicable:

(a) To incorporate demographic trends and factors in the global analysis of environment and development 
issues;

(b) To develop a better understanding of the relationships among demographic dynamics, technology, 
cultural behaviour, natural resources and life support systems;

(c) To assess human vulnerability in ecologically sensitive areas and centres of population to determine 
the priorities for action at all levels, taking full account of community defined needs.

Activities

Research on the interaction between demographic trends and factors and sustainable development

5.6. Relevant international, regional and national institutions should consider undertaking the following 
activities:

(a) Identifying the interactions between demographic processes, natural resources and life support systems, 
bearing in mind regional and subregional variations deriving from, inter alia, different levels of 
development;

(b) Integrating demographic trends and factors into the ongoing study of environmental change, using the 
expertise of international, regional and national research networks and of local communities, first, to 
study the human dimensions of environmental change and, second, to identify vulnerable areas;

(c) Identifying priority areas for action and developing strategies and programmes to mitigate the adverse 
impact of environmental change on human populations, and vice versa.

Means of implementation

(a) Financing and cost evaluation

5.7. The Conference secretariat has estimated the average total annual cost (1993-2000) of implementing 
the activities of this programme to be about $10 million from the international community on grant or 
concessional terms. These are indicative and order of magnitude estimates only and have not been reviewed 
by governments. Actual costs and financial terms, including any that are non-concessional, will depend 
upon, inter alia, the specific strategies and programmes governments decide upon for implementation.(b) 
Strengthening research programmes that integrate population, environment and development

5.8. In order to integrate demographic analysis into a broader social science perspective on environment 
and development, interdisciplinary research should be increased. International institutions and networks 
of experts should enhance their scientific capacity, taking full account of community experience and 
knowledge, and should disseminate the experience gained in multidisciplinary approaches and in linking 
theory to action.

5.9. Better modelling capabilities should be developed, identifying the range of possible outcomes of current 
human activities, especially the interrelated impact of demographic trends and factors, per capita resource 
use and wealth distribution, as well as the major migration flows that may be expected with increasing 
climatic events and cumulative environmental change that may destroy people's local livelihoods. 

(c) Developing information and public awareness

5.10. Socio-demographic information should be developed in a suitable format for interfacing with physical, 
biological and socio-economic data. Compatible spatial and temporal scales, cross-country and time-series 
information, as well as global behavioural indicators should be developed, learning from local communities' 
perceptions and attitudes.

5.11. Awareness should be increased at all levels concerning the need to optimize the sustainable use of 
resources through efficient resource management, taking into account the development needs of the 
populations of developing countries.

5.12. Awareness should be increased of the fundamental linkages between improving the status of women and 
demographic dynamics, particularly through women's access to education, primary and reproductive health 
care programmes, economic independence and their effective, equitable participation in all levels of 
decision-making. 

5.13. Results of research concerned with sustainable development issues should be disseminated through 
technical reports, scientific journals, the media, workshops, forums or other means so that the 
information can be used by decision makers at all levels and increase public awareness.


(d) Developing and/or enhancing institutional capacity and collaboration

5.14. Collaboration and exchange of information should be increased between research institutions and 
international, regional and national agencies and all other sectors (including the private sector, local 
communities, non-governmental organizations and scientific institutions) from both the industrialized 
and developing countries, as appropriate. 

5.15. Efforts should be intensified to enhance the capacities of national and local governments, the 
private sector and non-governmental organizations in developing countries to meet the growing needs 
for improved management of rapidly growing urban areas.


B. Formulating integrated national policies for environment and development, taking into account 
demographic trends and factors

Basis for action

5.16. Existing plans for sustainable development have generally recognized demographic trends and factors 
as elements that have a critical influence on consumption patterns, production, lifestyles and long-term 
sustainability. But in future, more attention will have to be given to these issues in general policy 
formulation and the design of development plans. To do this, all countries will have to improve their own 
capacities to assess the environment and development implications of their demographic trends and factors. 
They will also need to formulate and implement policies and action programmes where appropriate. Policies 
should be designed to address the consequences of population growth built into population momentum, while 
at the same time incorporating measures to bring about demographic transition. They should combine 
environmental concerns and population issues within a holistic view of development whose primary goals 
include the alleviation of poverty; secure livelihoods; good health; quality of life; improvement of the 
status and income of women and their access to schooling and professional training, as well as fulfilment 
of their personal aspirations; and empowerment of individuals and communities. Recognizing that large 
increases in the size and number of cities will occur in developing countries under any likely population 
scenario, greater attention should be given to preparing for the needs, in particular of women and 
children, for improved municipal management and local government.

Objective

5.17. Full integration of population concerns into national planning, policy and decision-making processes 
should continue. Population policies and programmes should be considered, with full recognition of women's 
rights.

Activities

5.18. Governments and other relevant actors could, inter alia, undertake the following activities, with 
appropriate assistance from aid agencies, and report on their status of implementation to the 
International Conference on Population and Development to be held in 1994, especially to its committee on 
population and environment.

(a) Assessing the implications of national demographic trends and factors

5.19. The relationships between demographic trends and factors and environmental change and between 
environmental degradation and the components of demographic change should be analysed.

5.20. Research should be conducted on how environmental factors interact with socio-economic factors as 
a cause of migration.

5.21. Vulnerable population groups (such as rural landless workers, ethnic minorities, refugees, 
migrants, displaced people, women heads of household) whose changes in demographic structure may have 
specific impacts on sustainable development should be identified.

5.22. An assessment should be made of the implications of the age structure of the population on resource 
demand and dependency burdens, ranging from educational expenses for the young to health care and support
for the elderly, and on household income generation.

5.23. An assessment should also be made of national population carrying capacity in the context of 
satisfaction of human needs and sustainable development, and special attention should be given to critical 
resources, such as water and land, and environmental factors, such as ecosystem health and biodiversity.

5.24. The impact of national demographic trends and factors on the traditional livelihoods of indigenous 
groups and local communities, including changes in traditional land use because of internal population 
pressures, should be studied.

(b) Building and strengthening a national information base

5.25. National databases on demographic trends and factors and environment should be built and/or 
strengthened, disaggregating data by ecological region (ecosystem approach), and population/environment 
profiles should be established by region.

5.26. Methodologies and instruments should be developed to identify areas where sustainability is, or 
may be, threatened by the environmental effects of demographic trends and factors, incorporating both 
current and projected demographic data linked to natural environmental processes. 

5.27. Case-studies of local level responses by different groups to demographic dynamics should be 
developed, particularly in areas subject to environmental stress and in deteriorating urban centres.

5.28. Population data should be disaggregated by, inter alia, sex and age in order to take into account 
the implications of the gender division of labour for the use and management of natural resources.

(c) Incorporating demographic features into policies and plans

5.29. In formulating human settlements policies, account should be taken of resource needs, waste 
production and ecosystem health.

5.30. The direct and induced effects of demographic changes on environment and development programmes 
should, where appropriate, be integrated, and the impact on demographic features assessed.

5.31. National population policy goals and programmes that are consistent with national environment 
and development plans for sustainability and in keeping with the freedom, dignity and personally held 
values of individuals should be established and implemented.

5.32. Appropriate socio-economic policies for the young and the elderly, both in terms of family and 
state support systems, should be developed.

5.33. Policies and programmes should be developed for handling the various types of migrations that 
result from or induce environmental disruptions, with special attention to women and vulnerable 
groups.

5.34. Demographic concerns, including concerns for environmental migrants and displaced people, should 
be incorporated in the programmes for sustainable development of relevant international and regional 
institutions.

5.35. National reviews should be conducted and the integration of population policies in national 
development and environment strategies should be monitored nationally.

Means of implementation

(a) Financing and cost evaluation

5.36. The Conference secretariat has estimated the average total annual cost (1993-2000) of implementing 
the activities of this programme to be about $90 million from the international community on grant or 
concessional terms. These are indicative and order of magnitude estimates only and have not been 
reviewed by governments. Actual costs and financial terms, including any that are non-concessional, 
will depend upon, inter alia, the specific strategies and programmes governments decide upon for 
implementation.

(b) Raising awareness of demographic and sustainable development interactions

5.37. Understanding of the interactions between demographic trends and factors and sustainable 
development should be increased in all sectors of society. Stress should be placed on local and 
national action. Demographic and sustainable development education should be coordinated and 
integrated in both the formal and non-formal education sectors. Particular attention should be 
given to population literacy programmes, notably for women. Special emphasis should be placed on 
the linkage between these programmes, primary environmental care and the provision of primary health 
care and services.

(c) Strengthening institutions

5.38. The capacity of national, regional and local structures to deal with issues relating to 
demographic trends and factors and sustainable development should be enhanced. This would involve 
strengthening the relevant bodies responsible for population issues to enable them to elaborate 
policies consistent with the national prospects for sustainable development. Cooperation among 
government, national research institutions, non-governmental organizations and local communities 
in assessing problems and evaluating policies should also be enhanced. 5.39. The capacity of the 
relevant United Nations organs, organizations and bodies, international and regional 
intergovernmental bodies, non-governmental organizations and local communities should, as appropriate, 
be enhanced to help countries develop sustainable development policies on request and, as appropriate, 
provide assistance to environmental migrants and displaced people.

5.40. Inter-agency support for national sustainable development policies and programmes should be 
improved through better coordination of population and environment activities.

(d) Promoting human resource development

5.41. The international and regional scientific institutions should assist Governments, upon request, 
to include concerns regarding the population/environment interactions at the global, ecosystem and 
micro-levels in the training of demographers and population and environment specialists. Training 
should include research on linkages and ways to design integrated strategies.

C. Implementing integrated environment and development programmes at the local level, taking into account 
demographic trends and factors

Basis for action

5.42. Population programmes are more effective when implemented together with appropriate cross-sectoral 
policies. To attain sustainability at the local level, a new framework is needed that integrates demographic 
trends and factors with such factors as ecosystem health, technology and human settlements, and with 
socio-economic structures and access to resources. Population programmes should be consistent with 
socio-economic and environmental planning. Integrated sustainable development programmes should closely 
correlate action on demographic trends and factors with resource management activities and development 
goals that meet the needs of the people concerned.

Objective

5.43. Population programmes should be implemented along with natural resource management and development 
programmes at the local level that will ensure sustainable use of natural resources, improve the quality 
of life of the people and enhance environmental quality.

Activities

5.44. Governments and local communities, including community-based women's organizations and national 
non-governmental organizations, consistent with national plans, objectives, strategies and priorities, 
could, inter alia, undertake the activities set out below with the assistance and cooperation of 
international organizations, as appropriate. Governments could share their experience in the 
implementation of Agenda 21 at the International Conference on Population and Development, to be held 
in 1994, especially its committee on population and environment.

(a) Developing a framework for action

5.45. An effective consultative process should be established and implemented with concerned groups of 
society where the formulation and decision-making of all components of the programmes are based on a 
nationwide consultative process drawing on community meetings, regional workshops and national seminars, 
as appropriate. This process should ensure that views of women and men on needs, perspective and 
constraints are equally well reflected in the design of programmes, and that solutions are rooted in 
specific experience. The poor and underprivileged should be priority groups in this process.

5.46. Nationally determined policies for integrated and multifaceted programmes, with special attention 
to women, to the poorest people living in critical areas and to other vulnerable groups should be 
implemented, ensuring the involvement of groups with a special potential to act as agents for change 
and sustainable development. Special emphasis should be placed on those programmes that achieve multiple 
objectives, encouraging sustainable economic development, and mitigating adverse impacts of demographic 
trends and factors, and avoiding long-term environmental damage. Food security, access to secure tenure, 
basic shelter, and essential infrastructure, education, family welfare, women's reproductive health, 
family credit schemes, reforestation programmes, primary environmental care, women's employment should, 
as appropriate, be included among other factors.

5.47. An analytical framework should be developed to identify complementary elements of sustainable 
development policies as well as the national mechanisms to monitor and evaluate their effects on population 
dynamics.

5.48. Special attention should be given to the critical role of women in population/environment programmes 
and in achieving sustainable development. Projects should take advantage of opportunities to link social, 
economic and environmental gains for women and their families. Empowerment of women is essential and 
should be assured through education, training and policies to accord and improve women's right and access 
to assets, human and civil rights, labour-saving measures, job opportunities and participation in 
decision-making. Population/environment programmes must enable women to mobilize themselves to alleviate 
their burden and improve their capacity to participate in and benefit from socio-economic development. 
Specific measures should be undertaken to close the gap between female and male illiteracy rates.

(b) Supporting programmes that promote changes in demographic trends and factors towards sustainability

5.49. Reproductive health programmes and services, should, as appropriate, be developed and enhanced 
to reduce maternal and infant mortality from all causes and enable women and men to fulfil their 
personal aspirations in terms of family size, in a way in keeping with their freedom and dignity and 
personally held values.

5.50. Governments should take active steps to implement, as a matter of urgency, in accordance with 
country-specific conditions and legal systems, measures to ensure that women and men have the same 
right to decide freely and responsibly on the number and spacing of their children, to have access to 
the information, education and means, as appropriate, to enable them to exercise this right in keeping 
with their freedom, dignity and personally held values taking into account ethical and cultural 
considerations.

5.51. Governments should take active steps to implement programmes to establish and strengthen 
preventive and curative health facilities that include women-centred, women-managed, safe and 
effective reproductive health care and affordable, accessible services, as appropriate, for the 
responsible planning of family size, in keeping with freedom, dignity and personally held values and 
taking into account ethical and cultural considerations. Programmes should focus on providing 
comprehensive health care, including pre-natal care, education and information on health and 
responsible parenthood and should provide the opportunity for all women to breast-feed fully, at 
least during the first four months post-partum. Programmes should fully support women's productive 
and reproductive roles and well being, with special attention to the need for providing equal and 
improved health care for all children and the need to reduce the risk of maternal and child mortality 
and sickness.

5.52. Consistent with national priorities, culturally based information and education programmes that 
transmit reproductive health messages to men and women that are easily understood should be developed.

(c) Creating appropriate institutional conditions

5.53. Constituencies and institutional conditions to facilitate the implementation of demographic 
activities should, as appropriate, be fostered. This requires support and commitment from political, 
indigenous, religious and traditional authorities, the private sector and the national scientific 
community. In developing these appropriate institutional conditions, countries should closely involve 
established national machinery for women.

5.54. Population assistance should be coordinated with bilateral and multilateral donors to ensure 
that population needs and requirements of all developing countries are addressed, fully respecting 
the overall coordinating responsibility and the choice and strategies of the recipient countries.

5.55. Coordination should be improved at local and international levels. Working practices should be 
enhanced in order to make optimum use of resources, draw on collective experience and improve the 
implementation of programmes. UNFPA and other relevant agencies should strengthen the coordination 
of international cooperation activities with recipient and donor countries in order to ensure that 
adequate funding is available to respond to growing needs.

5.56. Proposals should be developed for local, national and international population/environment 
programmes in line with specific needs for achieving sustainability. Where appropriate, institutional 
changes must be implemented so that old-age security does not entirely depend on input from family 
members.

Means of implementation

(a) Financing and cost evaluation

5.57. The Conference secretariat has estimated the average total annual cost (1993-2000) of implementing 
the activities of this programme to be about $7 billion including about $3.5 billion from the 
international community on grant or concessional terms. These are indicative and order of magnitude 
estimates only and have not been reviewed by governments. Actual costs and financial terms, including 
any that are non-concessional, will depend upon, inter alia, the specific strategies and programmes 
governments decide upon for implementation.

(b) Research

5.58. Research should be undertaken with a view to developing specific action programmes; it will 
be necessary to establish priorities between proposed areas of research.

5.59. Socio-demographic research should be conducted on how populations respond to a changing environment.

5.60. Understanding of socio-cultural and political factors that can positively influence acceptance of 
appropriate population policy instruments should be improved.

5.61. Surveys of changes in needs for appropriate services relating to responsible planning of family size, 
reflecting variations among different socio-economic groups and variations in different geographical 
regions should be undertaken.

(c) Human resource development and capacity-building

5.62. The areas of human resource development and capacity-building, with particular attention to the 
education and training of women, are areas of critical importance and are a very high priority in the 
implementation of population programmes.

5.63. Workshops to help programme and projects managers to link population programmes to other development 
and environmental goals should be conducted.

5.64. Educational materials, including guides/workbooks for planners and decision makers and other actors 
of population/environment/development programmes, should be developed.

5.65. Cooperation should be developed between Governments, scientific institutions and non-governmental 
organizations within the region, and similar institutions outside the region. Cooperation with local 
organizations should be fostered in ordered to raise awareness, engage in demonstration projects and 
report on the experience gained.

5.66. The recommendations contained in this chapter should in no way prejudice discussions at the 
International Conference on Population and Development in 1994, which will be the appropriate forum 
for dealing with population and development issues, taking into account the recommendations of the 
International Conference on Population, held in Mexico City in 1984, 1/ and the Forward-looking 
Strategies for the Advancement of Women, 2/ adopted by the World Conference to Review and Appraise 
the Achievements of the United Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, held in Nairobi in 
1985.

Notes

1/ Report of the International Conference on Population, Mexico City, 6-14 August 1984 (United Nations 
publication, Sales No. E.84.XIII.8), chap. I.

2/ Report of the World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade for 
Women: Equality, Development and Peace, Nairobi, 15-26 July 1985 (United Nations publication, Sales No. 
E.84.IV.10), chap. I, sect. A.A21: Demographic Dynamics and Sustainability (Ch. 5), Advance CopyPage 1


Chapter 6  -  Protection And Promotion Of Human Health 
      



This is a final, advanced version of a chapter of Agenda 21, as adopted by the Plenary in Rio  de Janeiro, 
on June 14, 1992. This document will be further edited, translated into the official languages, and 
published by the United Nations for the General Assembly this autumn.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 



                INTRODUCTION

6.1. Health and development are intimately interconnected. Both insufficient development leading to 
poverty and inappropriate development resulting in overconsumption, coupled with an expanding world 
population, can result in severe environmental health problems in both developing and developed nations. 
Action items under Agenda 21 must address the primary health needs of the world's population, since they 
are integral to the achievement of the goals of sustainable development and primary environmental care. 
The linkage of health, environmental and socio-economic improvements requires intersectoral efforts. 
Such efforts, involving education, housing, public works and community groups, including businesses, 
schools and universities and religious, civic and cultural organizations, are aimed at enabling people 
in their communities to ensure sustainable development. Particularly relevant is the inclusion of 
prevention programmes rather than relying solely on remediation and treatment. Countries ought to 
develop plans for priority actions, drawing on the programme areas in this chapter, which are based 
on cooperative planning by the various levels of government, non-governmental organizations and local 
communities. An appropriate international organization, such as WHO, should coordinate these activities.

PROGRAMME AREAS

6.2. The following programme areas are contained in this chapter: 

(a) Meeting primary health care needs, particularly in rural areas;

(b) Control of communicable diseases;

(c) Protecting vulnerable groups;

(d) Meeting the urban health challenge;

(e) Reducing health risks from environmental pollution and hazards.


PROGRAMME AREAS

A. Meeting primary health care needs, particularly in rural areas

Basis for action

6.3. Health ultimately depends on the ability to manage successfully the interaction between the 
physical, spiritual, biological and economic/social environment. Sound development is not possible 
without a healthy population; yet most developmental activities affect the environment to some degree, 
which in turn causes or exacerbates many health problems. Conversely, it is the very lack of 
development that adversely affects the health condition of many people, which can be alleviated only 
through development. The health sector cannot meet basic needs and objectives on its own; it is 
dependent on social, economic and spiritual development, while directly contributing to such 
development. It is also dependent on a healthy environment, including the provision of a safe water 
supply and sanitation and the promotion of a safe food supply and proper nutrition. Particular attention 
should be directed towards food safety, with priority placed on the elimination of food contamination; 
comprehensive and sustainable water policies to ensure safe drinking water and sanitation to preclude 
both microbial and chemical contamination; and promotion of health education, immunization and provision 
of essential drugs. Education and appropriate services regarding responsible planning of family size, 
with respect for cultural, religious and social aspects, in keeping with freedom, dignity and personally 
held values and taking into account ethical and cultural considerations, also contribute to these 
intersectoral activities.

Objectives

6.4. Within the overall strategy to achieve health for all by the year 2000, the objectives are to meet 
the basic health needs of rural peri-urban and urban populations; to provide the necessary specialized 
environmental health services; and to coordinate the involvement of citizens, the health sector, the 
health-related sectors and relevant non-health sectors (business, social, educational and religious 
institutions) in solutions to health problems. As a matter of priority, health service coverage should 
be achieved for population groups in greatest need, particularly those living in rural areas.

Activities

6.5. National Governments and local authorities, with the support of relevant non-governmental 
organizations and international organizations, in the light of countries' specific conditions and needs, 
should strengthen their health sector programmes, with special attention to rural needs, to:

(a) Build basic health infrastructures, monitoring and planning systems:

(i) Develop and strengthen primary health care systems that are practical, community-based, scientifically 
sound, socially acceptable and appropriate to their needs and that meet basic health needs for clean water, 
safe food and sanitation;

(ii) Support the use and strengthening of mechanisms that improve coordination between health and related 
sectors at all appropriate levels of government, and in communities and relevant organizations;

(iii) Develop and implement rational and affordable approaches to the establishment and maintenance of 
health facilities;

(iv) Ensure and, where appropriate, increase provision of social services support;

(v) Develop strategies, including reliable health indicators, to monitor the progress and evaluate the 
effectiveness of health programmes;

(vi) Explore ways to finance the health system based on the assessment of the resources needed and 
identify the various financing alternatives;

(vii) Promote health education in schools, information exchange, technical support and training;

(viii) Support initiatives for self-management of services by vulnerable groups;

(ix) Integrate traditional knowledge and experience into national health systems, as appropriate;

(x) Promote the provisions for necessary logistics for outreach activities, particularly in rural areas;

(xi) Promote and strengthen community-based rehabilitation activities for the rural handicapped.

(b) Support research and methodology development:

(i) Establish mechanisms for sustained community involvement in environmental health activities, 
including optimization of the appropriate use of community financial and human resources;

(ii) Conduct environmental health research, including behaviour research and research on ways to increase 
coverage and ensure greater utilization of services by peripheral, underserved and vulnerable populations, 
as appropriate to good prevention services and health care; (iii) Conduct research into traditional 
knowledge of prevention and curative health practices.

Means of implementation

(a) Financing and cost evaluation

6.6. The Conference secretariat has estimated the average total annual cost (1993-2000) of implementing 
the activities of this programme to be about $40 billion, including about $5 billion from the 
international community on grant or concessional terms. These are indicative and order of magnitude 
estimates only and have not been reviewed by Governments. Actual costs and financial terms, including any 
that are non-concessional, will depend upon, inter alia, the specific strategies and programmes Governments 
decide upon for implementation.

(b) Scientific and technological means

6.7. New approaches to planning and managing health care systems and facilities should be tested, and 
research on ways of integrating appropriate technologies into health infrastructures supported. The 
development of scientifically sound health technology should enhance adaptability to local needs and 
maintainability by community resources, including the maintenance and repair of equipment used in health 
care. Programmes to facilitate the transfer and sharing of information and expertise should be developed, 
including communication methods and educational materials.

(c) Human resource development

6.8. Intersectoral approaches to the reform of health personnel development should be strengthened to 
ensure its relevance to the "Health for All" strategies. Efforts to enhance managerial skills at the 
district level should be supported, with the aim of ensuring the systematic development and efficient 
operation of the basic health system. Intensive, short, practical training programmes with emphasis on 
skills in effective communication, community organization and facilitation of behaviour change should 
be developed in order to prepare the local personnel of all sectors involved in social development for 
carrying out their respective roles. In cooperation with the education sector, special health education 
programmes should be developed focusing on the role of women in the health-care system.

(d) Capacity-building

6.9. Governments should consider adopting enabling and facilitating strategies to promote the 
participation of communities in meeting their own needs, in addition to providing direct support to 
the provision of health-care services. A major focus should be the preparation of community-based 
health and health-related workers to assume an active role in community health education, with emphasis 
on team work, social mobilization and the support of other development workers. National programmes 
should cover district health systems in urban, peri-urban and rural areas, the delivery of health
programmes at the district level, and the development and support of referral services.

B. Control of communicable diseases

Basis for action

6.10. Advances in the development of vaccines and chemotherapeutic agents have brought many 
communicable diseases under control. However, there remain many important communicable diseases for 
which environmental control measures are indispensable, especially in the field of water supply and 
sanitation. Such diseases include cholera, diarrhoeal diseases, leishmaniasis, malaria and 
schistosomiasis. In all such instances, the environmental measures, either as an integral part of 
primary health care or undertaken outside the health sector, form an indispensable component of overall 
disease control strategies, together with health and hygiene education, and in some cases, are the 
only component.

6.11. With HIV infection levels estimated to increase to 30-40 million by the year 2000, the 
socio-economic impact of the pandemic is expected to be devastating for all countries, and increasingly 
for women and children. While direct health costs will be substantial, they will be dwarfed by the 
indirect costs of the pandemic - mainly costs associated with the loss of income and decreased 
productivity of the workforce. The pandemic will inhibit growth of the service and industrial sectors 
and significantly increase the costs of human capacity-building and retraining. The agricultural sector 
is particularly affected where production is labour-intensive.

Objectives

6.12. A number of goals have been formulated through extensive consultations in various international 
forums attended by virtually all Governments, relevant United Nations organizations (including WHO, 
UNICEF, UNFPA, UNESCO, UNDP and the World Bank) and a number of non-governmental organizations. Goals 
(including but not limited to those listed below) are recommended for implementation by all countries 
where they are applicable, with appropriate adaptation to the specific situation of each country in 
terms of phasing, standards, priorities and availability of resources, with respect for cultural, 
religious and social aspects, in keeping with freedom, dignity and personally held values and taking 
into account ethical considerations. Additional goals that are particularly relevant to a country's 
specific situation should be added in the country's national plan of action (Plan of Action for 
Implementing the World Declaration on the Survival, Protection and Development of Children in the 
1990s 1/). Such national level action plans should be coordinated and monitored from within the public 
health sector. Some major goals are:

(a) By the year 2000, to eliminate guinea worm disease (dracunculiasis);

(b) By the year 2000, eradicate polio;

(c) By the year 2000, to effectively control onchocerciasis (river blindness) and leprosy;

(d) By 1995, to reduce measles deaths by 95 per cent and reduce measles cases by 90 per cent compared 
with pre-immunization levels;

(e) By continued efforts, to provide health and hygiene education and to ensure universal access to 
safe drinking water and universal access to sanitary measures of excreta disposal, thereby markedly 
reducing waterborne diseases such as cholera and schistosomiasis and reducing:

(i) By the year 2000, the number of deaths from childhood diarrhoea in developing countries by 50 to 70 
per cent;

(ii) By the year 2000, the incidence of childhood diarrhoea in developing countries by at least 25 to 
50 per cent;

(f) By the year 2000, to initiate comprehensive programmes to reduce mortality from acute respiratory 
infections in children under five years by at least one third, particularly in countries with high 
infant mortality;

(g) By the year 2000, to provide 95 per cent of the world's child population with access to appropriate 
care for acute respiratory infections within the community and at first referral level;

(h) By the year 2000, to institute anti-malaria programmes in all countries where malaria presents a 
significant health problem and maintain the transmission-free status of areas freed from endemic 
malaria;

(i) By the year 2000, to implement control programmes in countries where major human parasitic 
infections are endemic and achieve an overall reduction in the prevalence of schistosomiasis and of 
other trematode infections by 40 per cent and 25 per cent, respectively, from a 1984 baseline, as 
well as a marked reduction in incidence, prevalence and intensity of filarial infections;

(j) To mobilize and unify national and international efforts against AIDS to prevent infection and to 
reduce the personal and social impact of HIV infection;

(k) To contain the resurgence of tuberculosis, with particular emphasis on multiple antibiotic 
resistant forms;

(l) To accelerate research on improved vaccines and implement to the fullest extent possible the use 
of vaccines in the prevention of disease.

Activities

6.13. Each national Government, in accordance with national plans for public health, priorities and 
objectives, should consider developing a national health action plan with appropriate international 
assistance and support, including, at a minimum, the following components:

(a) National public health systems:

(i) Programmes to identify environmental hazards in the causation of communicable diseases;

(ii) Monitoring systems of epidemiological data to ensure adequate forecasting of the introduction, 
spread or aggravation of communicable diseases;

(iii) Intervention programmes, including measures consistent with the principles of the global AIDS 
strategy;

(iv) Vaccines for the prevention of communicable diseases;

(b) Public information and health education:

Provide education and disseminate information on the risks of endemic communicable diseases and build 
awareness on environmental methods for control of communicable diseases to enable communities to play 
a role in the control of communicable diseases;

(c) Intersectoral cooperation and coordination:

(i) Second experienced health professionals to relevant sectors, such as planning, housing and 
agriculture;

(ii) Develop guidelines for effective coordination in the areas of professional training, assessment 
of risks and development of control technology;

(d) Control of environmental factors that influence the spread of communicable diseases:

Apply methods for the prevention and control of communicable diseases, including water supply and 
sanitation control, water pollution control, food quality control, integrated vector control, garbage 
collection and disposal and environmentally sound irrigation practices; (e) Primary health care system:

(i) Strengthen prevention programmes, with particular emphasis on adequate and balanced nutrition;

(ii) Strengthen early diagnostic programmes and improve capacities for early preventative/treatment 
action;

(iii) Reduce the vulnerability to HIV infection of women and their offspring;

(f) Support for research and methodology development:

(i) Intensify and expand multidisciplinary research, including focused efforts on the mitigation and 
environmental control of tropical diseases;

(ii) Carry out intervention studies to provide a solid epidemiological basis for control policies and 
to evaluate the efficiency of alternative approaches;

(iii) Undertake studies in the population and among health workers to determine the influence of 
cultural, behavioural and social factors on control policies;

(g) Development and dissemination of technology:

(i) Develop new technologies for the effective control of communicable diseases;

(ii) Promote studies to determine how to optimally disseminate results from research;

(iii) Ensure technical assistance, including the sharing of knowledge and know-how.

Means of implementation

(a) Financing and cost evaluation

6.14. The Conference secretariat has estimated the average total annual cost (1993-2000) of implementing 
the activities of this programme to be about $4 billion, including about $900 million from the international 
community on grant or concessional terms. These are indicative and order of magnitude estimates only and 
have not been reviewed by Governments. Actual costs and financial terms, including any that are 
non-concessional, will depend upon, inter alia, the specific strategies and programmes Governments decide 
upon for implementation.

(b) Scientific and technological means6.15. Efforts to prevent and control diseases should include 
investigations of the epidemiological, social and economic bases for the development of more effective 
national strategies for the integrated control of communicable diseases. Cost-effective methods of 
environmental control should be adapted to local developmental conditions.

(c) Human resource development

6.16. National and regional training institutions should promote broad intersectoral approaches to 
prevention and control of communicable diseases, including training in epidemiology and community 
prevention and control, immunology, molecular biology and the application of new vaccines. Health 
education materials should be developed for use by community workers and for the education of mothers 
for the prevention and treatment of diarrhoeal diseases in the home.

(d) Capacity-building

6.17. The health sector should develop adequate data on the distribution of communicable diseases, as 
well as the institutional capacity to respond and collaborate with other sectors for prevention, 
mitigation and correction of communicable disease hazards through environmental protection. The advocacy 
at policy- and decision-making levels should be gained, professional and societal support mobilized, and 
communities organized in developing self-reliance.

C. Protecting vulnerable groups

Basis for action

6.18. In addition to meeting basic health needs, specific emphasis has to be given to protecting and 
educating vulnerable groups, particularly infants, youth, women, indigenous people and the very poor 
as a prerequisite for sustainable development. Special attention should also be paid to the health 
needs of the elderly and disabled population.

6.19. Infants and children. Approximately one third of the world's population are children under 15 years 
old. At least 15 million of these children die annually from such preventable causes as birth trauma, 
birth asphyxia, acute respiratory infections, malnutrition, communicable diseases and diarrhoea. The 
health of children is affected more severely than other population groups by malnutrition and adverse 
environmental factors, and many children risk exploitation as cheap labour or in prostitution.

6.20. Youth. As has been the historical experience of all countries, youth are particularly vulnerable 
to the problems associated with economic development, which often weakens traditional forms of social 
support essential for the healthy development, of young people. Urbanization and changes in social mores 
have increased substance abuse, unwanted pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases, including AIDS. 
Currently more than half of all people alive are under the age of 25 and 4 of every 5 live in developing 
countries. Therefore it is important to ensure that historical experience is not replicated.

6.21. Women. In developing countries, the health status of women remains relatively low, and during 
the 1980s poverty, malnutrition and general ill-health in women were even rising. Most women in 
developing countries still do not have adequate basic educational opportunities and they lack the 
means of promoting their health, responsibly controlling their reproductive life and improving their 
socio-economic status. Particular attention should be given to the provision of pre-natal care to 
ensure healthy babies.

6.22. Indigenous people and their communities. Indigenous people and their communities make up a 
significant percentage of global population. The outcomes of their experience have tended to be very 
similar in that the basis of their relationship with traditional lands has been fundamentally changed. 
They tend to feature disproportionately in unemployment, lack of housing, poverty and poor health. In 
many countries the number of indigenous people is growing faster than the general population. Therefore 
it is important to target health initiatives for indigenous people.

Objectives

6.23. The general objectives of protecting vulnerable groups are to ensure that all such individuals 
should be allowed to develop to their full potential (including healthy physical, mental and spiritual 
development); to ensure that young people can develop, establish and maintain healthy lives; to allow 
women to perform their key role in society; and to support indigenous people through educational, 
economic and technical opportunities.

6.24. Specific major goals for child survival, development and protection were agreed upon at the World 
Summit for Children and remain valid also for Agenda 21. Supporting and sectoral goals cover women's 
health and education, nutrition, child health, water and sanitation, basic education and children in 
difficult circumstances.

6.25. Governments should take active steps to implement, as a matter of urgency, in accordance with 
country specific conditions and legal systems, measures to ensure that women and men have the same 
right to decide freely and responsibly on the number and spacing of their children, to have access to 
the information, education and means, as appropriate, to enable them to exercise this right in keeping 
with their freedom, dignity and personally held values, taking into account ethical and cultural 
considerations.

6.26. Governments should take active steps to implement programmes to establish and strengthen preventive 
and curative health facilities which include women-centred, women-managed, safe and effective reproductive 
health care and affordable, accessible services, as appropriate, for the responsible planning of family 
size, in keeping with freedom, dignity and personally held values and taking into account ethical and 
cultural considerations. Programmes should focus on providing comprehensive health care, including pre-natal 
care, education and information on health and responsible parenthood and should provide the opportunity for 
all women to breast-feed fully, at least during the first four months post-partum. Programmes should fully 
support women's productive and reproductive roles and well being, with special attention to the need for 
providing equal and improved health care for all children and the need to reduce the risk of maternal and 
child mortality and sickness.

Activities

6.27. National Governments, in cooperation with local and non-governmental organizations, should initiate 
or enhance programmes in the following areas:

(a) Infants and children:

(i) Strengthen basic health-care services for children in the context of primary health-care delivery, 
including prenatal care, breast-feeding, immunization and nutrition programmes;

(ii) Undertake widespread adult education on the use of oral rehydration therapy for diarrhoea, treatment 
of respiratory infections and prevention of communicable diseases;

(iii) Promote the creation, amendment and enforcement of a legal framework protecting children from sexual 
and workplace exploitation;

(iv) Protect children from the effects of environmental and occupational toxic compounds;

(b) Youth:

Strengthen services for youth in health, education and social sectors in order to provide better 
information, education, counselling and treatment for specific health problems, including drug abuse;

(c) Women:

(i) Involve women's groups in decision-making at the national and community levels to identify health 
risks and incorporate health issues in national action programmes on women and development;

(ii) Provide concrete incentives to encourage and maintain attendance of women of all ages at school and 
adult education courses, including health education and training in primary, home and maternal health care;

(iii) Carry out baseline surveys and knowledge, attitude and practice studies on the health and nutrition 
of women throughout their life cycle, especially as related to the impact of environmental degradation and 
adequate resources;

(d) Indigenous people and their communities:

(i) Strengthen, through resources and self-management, preventative and curative health services;

(ii) Integrate traditional knowledge and experience into health systems.

Means of implementation

(a) Financing and cost evaluation

6.28. The Conference secretariat has estimated the average total annual cost (1993-2000) of implementing 
the activities of this programme to be about $3.7 billion, including about $400 million from the 
international community on grant or concessional terms. These are indicative and order of magnitude 
estimates only and have not been reviewed by Governments. Actual costs and financial terms, including 
any that are non-concessional, will depend upon, inter alia, the specific strategies and programmes 
Governments decide upon for implementation.

(b) Scientific and technological means

6.29. Educational, health and research institutions should be strengthened to provide support to improve 
the health of vulnerable groups. Social research on the specific problems of these groups should be 
expanded and methods for implementing flexible pragmatic solutions explored, with emphasis on preventive 
measures. Technical support should be provided to Governments, institutions and non-governmental 
organizations for youth, women, indigenous people in the health sector.

(c) Human resources development

6.30. The development of human resources for the health of children, youth and women should include 
reinforcement of educational institutions, promotion of interactive methods of education for health 
and increased use of mass media in disseminating information to the target groups. This requires the 
training of more community health workers, nurses, midwives, physicians, social scientists and educators, 
the education of mothers, families and communities and the strengthening of ministries of education, 
health, population etc.

(d) Capacity-building

6.31. Governments should promote, where necessary: (i) the organization of national, intercountry and 
interregional symposia and other meetings for the exchange of information among agencies and groups 
concerned with the health of children, youth, women and indigenous people, and (ii) women's 
organizations, youth groups and indigenous people's organizations to facilitate health and consult 
them on the creation, amendment and enforcement of legal frameworks to ensure a healthy environment 
for children, youth, women and indigenous peoples.

D. Meeting the urban health challenge

Basis for action

6.32. For hundreds of millions of people, the poor living conditions in urban and peri-urban areas 
are destroying lives, health, and social and moral values. Urban growth has outstripped society's 
capacity to meet human needs, leaving hundreds of millions of people with inadequate incomes, diets, 
housing and services. Urban growth exposes populations to serious environmental hazards and has 
outstripped the capacity of municipal and local governments to provide the environmental health 
services that the people need. All too often, urban development is associated with destructive 
effects on the physical environment and the resource base needed for sustainable development. 
Environmental pollution in urban areas is associated with excess morbidity and mortality. Overcrowding 
and inadequate housing contribute to respiratory diseases, tuberculosis, meningitis and other diseases. 
In urban environments, many factors that affect human health are outside the health sector. Improvements 
in urban health therefore will depend on coordinated action by all levels of government, health care 
providers, businesses, religious groups, social and educational institutions and citizens.

Objectives

6.33. The health and well-being of all urban dwellers must be improved so that they can contribute to 
economic and social development. The global objective is to achieve a 10 to 40 per cent improvement 
in health indicators by the year 2000. The same rate of improvement should be achieved for environmental, 
housing and health service indicators. These include the development of quantitative objectives for 
infant mortality, maternal mortality, percentage of low birth weight newborns and specific indicators 
(e.g. tuberculosis as an indicator of crowded housing, diarrhoeal diseases as indicators of inadequate 
water and sanitation, rates of industrial and transportation accidents that indicate possible 
opportunities for prevention of injury, and social problems such as drug abuse, violence and crime 
that indicate underlying social disorders).

Activities

6.34. Local authorities, with the appropriate support of national Governments and international 
organizations should be encouraged to take effective measures to initiate or strengthen the 
following activities:

(a) Develop and implement municipal and local health plans:

(i) Establish or strengthen intersectoral committees at both the political and technical level, 
including active collaboration on linkages with scientific, cultural, religious, medical, business, 
social and other city institutions, using networking arrangements;

(ii) Adopt or strengthen municipal or local "enabling strategies" that emphasize "doing with" rather 
than "doing for" and create supportive environments for health;

(iii) Ensure that public health education in schools, workplace, mass media etc. is provided or 
strengthened;

(iv) Encourage communities to develop personal skills and awareness of primary health care;

(v) Promote and strengthen community-based rehabilitation activities for the urban and peri-urban 
disabled and the elderly;

(b) Survey, where necessary, the existing health, social and environmental conditions in cities, 
including documentation of intra-urban differences;

(c) Strengthen environmental health services:

(i) Adopt health impact and environmental impact assessment procedures;

(ii) Provide basic and in-service training for new and existing personnel;

(d) Establish and maintain city networks for collaboration and exchange of models of good practice.

Means of implementation

(a) Financing and cost evaluation

6.35. The Conference secretariat has estimated the average total annual cost (1993-2000) of implementing 
the activities of this programme to be about $222 million, including about $22 million from the 
international community on grant or concessional terms. These are indicative and order of magnitude 
estimates only and have not been reviewed by Governments. Actual costs and financial terms, including 
any that are non-concessional, will depend upon, inter alia, the specific strategies and programmes 
Governments decide upon for implementation.

(b) Scientific and technological means6.36. Decision-making models should be further developed and more 
widely used to assess the costs and the health and environment impacts of alternative technologies and 
strategies. Improvement in urban development and management requires better national and municipal 
statistics based on practical, standardized indicators. Development of methods is a priority for the 
measurement of intra-urban and intra-district variations in health status and environmental conditions, 
and for the application of this information in planning and management.

(c) Human resources development

6.37. Programmes must supply the orientation and basic training of municipal staff required for the 
healthy city processes. Basic and in-service training of environmental health personnel will also be 
needed.

(d) Capacity-building

6.38. The programme is aimed towards improved planning and management capabilities in the municipal 
and local government and its partners in central Government, the private sector and universities. 
Capacity development should be focused on obtaining sufficient information, improving coordination 
mechanisms linking all the key actors, and making better use of available instruments and resources 
for implementation.

E. Reducing health risks from environmental pollution and hazards

Basis for action

6.39. In many locations around the world the general environment (air, water and land), workplaces and 
even individual dwellings are so badly polluted that the health of hundreds of millions of people is 
adversely affected. This is, inter alia, due to past and present developments in consumption and 
production patterns and lifestyles, in energy production and use, in industry, in transportation etc., 
with little or no regard for environmental protection. There have been notable improvements in some 
countries, but deterioration of the environment continues. The ability of countries to tackle pollution 
and health problems is greatly restrained because of lack of resources. Pollution control and health 
protection measures have often not kept pace with economic development. Considerable development-related 
environmental health hazards exist in the newly industrializing countries. Furthermore, the recent 
analysis of WHO has clearly established the interdependence among the factors of health, environment 
and development and has revealed that most countries are lacking such integration as would lead to an 
effective pollution control mechanism. 2/ Without prejudice to such criteria as may be agreed upon by 
the international community, or to standards which will have to be determined nationally, it will be 
essential in all cases to consider the systems of values prevailing in each country and the extent of 
the applicability of standards that are valid for the most advanced countries but may be inappropriate 
and of unwarranted social cost for the developing countries.

Objectives

6.40. The overall objective is to minimize hazards and maintain the environment to a degree that human 
health and safety is not impaired or endangered and yet encourage development to proceed. Specific
programme objectives are:

(a) By the year 2000, to incorporate appropriate environmental and health safeguards as part of 
national development programmes in all countries;

(b) By the year 2000, to establish, as appropriate, adequate national infrastructure and programmes 
for providing environmental injury, hazard surveillance and the basis for abatement in all countries;

(c) By the year 2000, to establish, as appropriate, integrated programmes for tackling pollution at 
the source and at the disposal site, with a focus on abatement actions in all countries;

(d) To identify and compile, as appropriate, the necessary statistical information on health effects to 
support cost/benefit analysis, including environmental health impact assessment for pollution control, 
prevention and abatement measures.

Activities

6.41. Nationally determined action programmes, with international assistance, support and coordination, 
where necessary, in this area should include:

(a) Urban air pollution:

(i) Develop appropriate pollution control technology on the basis of risk assessment and epidemiological 
research for the introduction of environmentally sound production processes and suitable safe mass transport;

(ii) Develop air pollution control capacities in large cities, emphasizing enforcement programmes and 
using monitoring networks, as appropriate;

(b) Indoor air pollution:

(i) Support research and develop programmes for applying prevention and control methods to reducing 
indoor air pollution, including the provision of economic incentives for the installation of appropriate 
technology;

(ii) Develop and implement health education campaigns, particularly in developing countries, to reduce 
the health impact of domestic use of biomass and coal;

(c) Water pollution:

(i) Develop appropriate water pollution control technologies on the basis of health risk assessment;

(ii) Develop water pollution control capacities in large cities;

(d) Pesticides:

Develop mechanisms to control the distribution and use of pesticides in order to minimize the risks to 
human health by transportation, storage, application and residual effects of pesticides used in agriculture 
and preservation of wood;

(e) Solid waste:

(i) Develop appropriate solid waste disposal technologies on the basis of health risk assessment;

(ii) Develop appropriate solid waste disposal capacities in large cities;

(f) Human settlements:

Develop programmes for improving health conditions in human settlements, in particular within slums and 
non-tenured settlements, on the basis of health risk assessment;

(g) Noise:

Develop criteria for maximum permitted safe noise exposure levels and promote noise assessment and 
control as part of environmental health programmes;

(h) Ionizing and non-ionizing radiation:

Develop and implement appropriate national legislation, standards and enforcement procedures on the 
basis of existing international guidelines;

(i) Effects of ultraviolet radiation:

(i) Undertake, as a matter of urgency, research on the effects on human health of the increasing 
ultraviolet radiation reaching the earth's surface as a consequence of depletion of the stratospheric 
ozone layer;

(ii) On the basis of the outcome of this research, consider taking appropriate remedial measures to 
mitigate the above-mentioned effects on human beings;

(j) Industry and energy production:

(i) Establish environmental health impact assessment procedures for the planning and development of 
new industries and energy facilities;

(ii) Incorporate appropriate health risk analysis in all national programmes for pollution control and 
management, with particular emphasis on toxic compounds such as lead;

(iii) Establish industrial hygiene programmes in all major industries for the surveillance of workers' 
exposure to health hazards;

(iv) Promote the introduction of environmentally sound technologies within the industry and energy 
sectors;

(k) Monitoring and assessment:

Establish, as appropriate, adequate environmental monitoring capacities for the surveillance of 
environmental quality and the health status of populations;

(l) Injury monitoring and reduction:

(i) Support, as appropriate, the development of systems to monitor the incidence and cause of injury to 
allow well-targeted intervention/prevention strategies;

(ii) Develop, in accordance with national plans, strategies in all sectors (industry, traffic and others) 
consistent with the WHO safe cities and safe communities programmes, to reduce the frequency and severity 
of injury;

(iii) Emphasize preventive strategies to reduce occupationally derived diseases and diseases caused by 
environmental and occupational toxins to enhance worker safety;

(m) Research promotion and methodology development:

(i) Support the development of new methods for the quantitative assessment of health benefits and cost 
associated with different pollution control strategies;

(ii) Develop and carry out interdisciplinary research on the combined health effects of exposure to 
multiple environmental hazards, including epidemiological investigations of long-term exposures to 
low levels of pollutants and the use of biological markers capable of estimating human exposures, 
adverse effects and susceptibility to environmental agents.

Means of implementation

(a) Financing and cost evaluation

6.42. The Conference secretariat has estimated the average total annual cost (1993-2000) of implementing 
the activities of this programme to be about $3 billion, including about $115 million from the 
international community on grant or concessional terms. These are indicative and order of magnitude 
estimates only and have not been reviewed by Governments. Actual costs and financial terms, including 
any that are non-concessional, will depend upon, inter alia, the specific strategies and programmes 
Governments decide upon for implementation.

(b) Scientific and technological means

6.43. Although technology to prevent or abate pollution is readily available for a large number of 
problems, for programme and policy development countries should undertake research within an 
intersectoral framework. Such efforts should include collaboration with the business sector. 
Cost/effect analysis and environmental impact assessment methods should be developed through 
cooperative international programmes and applied to the setting of priorities and strategies in 
relation to health and development.

6.44. In the activities listed in paragraph 6.41 (a) to (m) above, developing country efforts should 
be facilitated by access to and transfer of technology, know-how and information from the repositories 
of such knowledge and technologies, in conformity with chapter 34.

(c) Human resource development

6.45. Comprehensive national strategies should be designed to overcome the lack of qualified human 
resources, which is a major impediment to progress in dealing with environmental health hazards. 
Training should include environmental and health officials at all levels from managers to inspectors. 
More emphasis needs to be placed on including the subject of environmental health in the curricula of 
secondary schools and universities and on educating the public.

(d) Capacity-building

6.46. Each country should develop the knowledge and practical skills to foresee and identify 
environmental health hazards, and the capacity to reduce the risks. Basic capacity requirements must 
include knowledge about environmental health problems and awareness on the part of leaders, citizens 
and specialists; operational mechanisms for intersectoral and intergovernmental cooperation in development 
planning and management and in combating pollution; arrangements for involving private and community 
interests in dealing with social issues; delegation of authority and distribution of resources to 
intermediate and local levels of government to provide front-line capabilities to meet environmental 
health needs.

Notes

1/ A/45/625, annex.

2/ Report of the WHO Commission on Health and Environment (Geneva, forthcoming).

A21: Health (Ch. 6), Advance CopyPage 1





